Introducing the AI Gateway (#3996)
Helicone/helicone: bifrost/app/blog/blogs/introducing-ai-gateway/src.mdx

**1 API, 100+ Models**

The Helicone AI Gateway is now available in beta.

> Built in Rust for performance, the AI Gateway lets you switch between 100+ AI models without rewriting integrations or managing multiple API keys. The AI Gateway handles failovers, rate limiting, caching, and observability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Built in Rust for performance, the Helicone AI Gateway lets you switch between 100+ AI models blazingly fast - without any new dependency or rewriting of integrations.

The AI Gateway handles failovers, rate limiting, caching, and observability with a single line of code.
```

```bash
# Get started in 30 seconds
npx @helicone/ai-gateway
```

```typescript
// Same code, any provider
const openai = new OpenAI({
  baseURL: "http://localhost:8080/ai"
});

const response = await openai.chat.completions.create({

>   model: "anthropic/claude-3-sonnet"  // Route to Claude via OpenAI syntax

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  model: "anthropic/claude-3-sonnet"  // Route to Claude or any other model via the familiar OpenAI syntax
```

});
```

> Start routing AI traffic like the above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Get started with the [Helicone AI Gateway](https://docs.helicone.ai/ai-gateway/quickstart), or continue reading to learn more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Get started with the [Helicone AI Gateway here](https://docs.helicone.ai/ai-gateway/quickstart)!
```

---

## Why We're Building the Helicone AI Gateway

> The AI development space is progressing at an exponential rate. We see it every day at Helicone—over 90% of our users run 5+ LLMs in production, each with its own SDK, auth scheme, rate limits, and quirks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The AI development space is progressing at an exponential rate. We see it every day at Helicone. Over 90% of our users run 5+ LLMs in production, each with its own SDK, auth scheme, rate limits, and quirks.
```

> Keeping up today means rewriting integrations for every new model, managing a maze of API keys, engineering custom fallbacks for provider outages, and constantly tuning traffic for cost or compliance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keeping up means rewriting integrations every time a new model is released, managing a maze of API configurations, engineering custom fallbacks for provider outages, and constantly tuning traffic for cost or compliance.
```

We've talked to hundreds of high-growth AI companies over the past two years. The same frustrations come up in every conversation:

**"The AI space moves so fast, new models drop weekly and we were constantly rewriting integrations."** - Engineering lead at a 50-person AI startup

> **"We spent an entire sprint building custom fallback logic, and now we have to constantly maintain it to ensure our product is always reliable."** - CTO of Greptile.com

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**"We spent an entire sprint building custom fallback logic, and now we have to constantly maintain it to ensure our product is always reliable."** - CTO of a high-growth, YC-backed company
```
^ just to keep consistent with the rest of the "authors"

**"We outgrew our routing solution which couldn't scale for our growth and had to build our own. Now we're shopping for alternatives again."** - CTO of a 100-person AI startup

> Every AI company hits the same problems.

Reviewer: With over 80% of companies leveraging AI, they all keep hitting the same pain points.

> Here's what we realized: routing is a solved problem. It just needs to be built properly. You wouldn't use NGINX written in TypeScript or Python - that would be insane. Critical infrastructure demands performance, reliability, and predictable behavior under load.

Reviewer: This is the crux of the piece! Potentially we wrap it up in a `<BottomLine />` component? 

![CleanShot 2025-06-24 at 17 13 47@2x](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e10f4c16-c847-4fed-b2a9-77b56351af3b)

```suggestion
<BottomLine
title="Every AI company is hitting the same issues"
description="Here's what we realized: routing is a solved problem. It just needs to be built properly. You wouldn't use NGINX written in TypeScript or Python - that would be insane. Critical infrastructure demands performance, reliability, and predictable behavior under load."
/>
```

OR keeping the title as "Bottom Line" could also work.. Just looking at ways to highlight this text even further. 

Another alternative could be to pick up the best line and simply maintain the rest of the text outside the component - so something like:

```
<BottomLine
title="Bottom Line"
description="Over 80% of companies today leveraging AI and they all keep hitting the same pain points."
/>

Here's what we realized: **routing is a solved problem**. It just needs to be built properly. 

You wouldn't use NGINX written in TypeScript or Python - that would be insane. Critical infrastructure demands performance, reliability, and predictable behavior under load.
```

> Every team was building their own AI gateway or settling for subpar solutions because no one had built the definitive one yet. But once someone builds it right - in Rust, self-hosted, designed for scale, by people who've built routers for years - it becomes the default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every team has been building their own AI gateway or settling for subpar solutions because there hasn't been a definitively best one yet. Too complex, too slow, or just not fully featured, we spotted an opportunity to build an AI gateway that is in Rust, open-sourced, designed for scale, by people who've built routers for years.

**We believe we've built the default for LLM routing.**
```

> The Helicone AI Gateway is our answer. A lightweight Rust router inspired by NGINX that removes the integration tax so you can focus on shipping features. **We're building the routing infrastructure that every AI company will eventually use.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A lightweight, blazing fast, easy-to-setup router inspired by NGINX -  stripping away any integration tax so you can focus only on shipping features.

 **We're building the routing infrastructure that will win because it "simply works".**
```

> ## Why This Will Become the Default

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Why This Is The New Default
```

Reviewer: hehe even more assertive ⚡️

> NGINX didn't win because it had the best marketing. It won because it was built right - performant, reliable, and boring. Redis didn't become the default cache because of features. It became default because it just worked, everywhere, for everyone.

Reviewer: Love sm

> We're applying the same principles to AI routing. Rust for performance that doesn't degrade. Self-hosting so you never depend on our uptime. Apache license so you never worry about our business model. Deploy anywhere because your infrastructure choices shouldn't limit your routing options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We're applying the same principles to AI routing. 
- Rust for the performance your users deserve.
- Self-hosting so you never depend on someone else's uptime. 
- Apache license so you never worry about our business model. 
- Lightweight binary so your deployment options are endless.
```

> The AI gateway that wins will be the one that's fastest to deploy, hardest to break, and impossible to outgrow. That's what we built.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We're convinced the AI gateway that wins will be the one that's fastest to deploy, hardest to break, and impossible to outgrow. So that's what we built.
```

## Our Mission

> We build for high-growth AI startups whose primary focus should be building features that differentiate you in the fastest growing market in history, not routing infrastructure and outage fixes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We build for high-growth AI startups, whose primary focus is standing out in the fastest growing market in history.
```

> The AI Gateway is part of our bigger mission: helping AI teams ship fast without breaking things. Reliable infrastructure that just works, so you can focus on what makes your product unique.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Helicone AI Gateway is part of our bigger mission: **helping AI teams ship fast without breaking things.** Reliable infrastructure that just works, so you can focus on what makes your product unique.
```

## Get Started

> The AI development space is moving fast, but reliability can't be an afterthought. If you believe AI infrastructure should be as dependable as the rest of your stack, start with our GitHub repo and give us a star.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The AI development space is moving fast, but **reliability can't be an afterthought**. If you believe AI infrastructure should be as dependable as the rest of your stack, start with our GitHub repo and give us a star.
```

<CallToAction
  title="Try the Helicone AI Gateway"

>   description="Open source, self-hosted, and ready to deploy in your infrastructure today."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  description="Unified interface for all your LLM requests, while reducing LLM costs by up to 95%. Open-sourced, blazing fast."
```
